The Story of Madhu
I met little Madhu several years ago, when I lived alone in an obscure town near the Himalayan
foothills. I was in my late twenties then, and my outlook on life was still quite romantic; the cynicism
that was to come with the thirties had not yet set in.
I preferred the solitude of the small district town to the kind of social life I might have found in the
cities; and in my books, my writing and the surrounding hills, there was enough for my pleasure and
occupation.
On summer mornings I would often sit beneath an old mango tree, with a notebook or a sketch pad
on my knees. The house which I had rented (for a very nominal sum) stood on the outskirts of the
town; and a large tank and a few poor houses could be seen from the garden wall. A narrow public
pathway passed under the low wall.
One morning, while I sat beneath the mango tree, I saw a young girl of about nine, wearing torn
clothes, darting about on the pathway and along the high banks of the tank.
Sometimes she stopped to look at me; and, when I showed that I noticed her, she felt encouraged
and gave me a shy, fleeting smile. The next day I discovered her leaning over the garden wall,
following my actions as I paced up and down on the grass.
In a few days an acquaintance had been formed. I began to take the girl’s presence for granted, and
even to look for her; and she, in turn, would linger about on the pathway until she saw me come out of
the house.
One day, as she passed the gate, I called her to me.
‘What is your name?’ I asked. ‘And where do you live?’
‘Madhu,’she said, brushing back her long untidy black hair and smiling at me from large black
eyes. She pointed across the road: ‘I live with my grandmother.’
‘Is she very old?’ I asked.
Madhu nodded confidingly and whispered: ‘A hundred years …’
‘We will never be that old,’ I said. She was very slight and frail, like a flower growing in a rock,
vulnerable to wind and rain.
I discovered later that the old lady was not her grandmother but a childless woman who had found
the baby girl on the banks of the tank. Madhu’s real parentage was unknown; but the wizened old
woman had, out of compassion, brought up the child as her own.
My gate once entered, Madhu included the garden in her circle of activities. She was there every
morning, chasing butterflies, stalking squirrels and mynahs, her voice brimming with laughter, her
slight figure flitting about between the trees.
Sometimes, but not often, I gave her a toy or a new dress; and one day she put aside her shyness
and brought me a present of a nose-gay, made up of marigolds and wild blue-cotton flowers.
‘For you,’she said, and put the flowers in my lap.
‘They are very beautiful,’ I said, picking out the brightest marigold and putting it in her hair. ‘But
they are not as beautiful as you.’
More than a year passed before I began to take more than a mildly patronizing interest in Madhu.
It occurred to me after some time that she should be taught to read and write, and I asked a local
teacher to give her lessons in the garden for an hour every day. She clapped her hands with pleasure
at the prospect of what was to be for her a fascinating new game.
In a few weeks Madhu was surprising us with her capacity for absorbing knowledge. She always
came to me to repeat the lessons of the day, and pestered me with questions on a variety of subjects.
How big was the world? And were the stars really like our world? Or were they the sons and
daughters of the Sun and the Moon?
My interest in Madhu deepened, and my life, so empty till then, became imbued with a new
purpose. As she sat on the grass beside me, reading aloud, or listening to me with a look of complete
trust and belief, all the love that had been lying dormant in me during my years of self-exile surfaced
in a sudden surge of tenderness.
Three years glided away imperceptibly, and at the age of 13 Madhu was on the verge of
blossoming into a woman. I began to feel a certain responsibility towards her.
It was dangerous, I knew, to allow a child so pretty to live almost alone and unprotected, and to run
unrestrained about the grounds. And in a censorious society she would be made to suffer if she spent
too much time in my company.
She could see no need for any separation; but I decided to send her to a mission school in the next
district, where I could visit her from time to time.
‘But why?’said Madhu. ‘I can learn more from you, and from the teacher who comes. I am so
happy here.’
‘You will meet other girls and make many friends,’ I told her. ‘I will come to see you. And, when
you come home, we will be even happier. It is good that you should go.’
It was the middle of June, a hot and oppressive month in the Siwaliks. Madhu had expressed her
readiness to go to school, and when, one evening, I did not see her as usual in the garden, I thought
nothing of it; but the next day I was informed that she had fever and could not leave the house.
Illness was something Madhu had not known before, and for this reason I felt afraid. I hurried
down the path which led to the old woman’s cottage. It seemed strange that I had never once entered it
during my long friendship with Madhu.
It was a humble mud hut, the ceiling just high enough to enable me to stand upright, the room dark
but clean. Madhu was lying on a string cot exhausted by fever, her eyes closed, her long hair unkempt,
one small hand hanging over the side.
It struck me then how little, during all this time, I had thought of her physical comforts. There was
no chair; I knelt down, and took her hand in mine. I knew, from the fierce heat of her body, that she
was seriously ill.
She recognized my touch, and a smile passed across her face before she opened her eyes. She held
on to my hand, then laid it across her cheek.
I looked round the little room in which she had grown up. It had scarcely an article of furniture
apart from two string cots, on one of which the old woman sat and watched us, her white, wizened
head nodding like a puppet’s.
In a corner lay Madhu’s little treasures. I recognized among them the presents which during the past
four years I had given her. She had kept everything. On her dark arm she still wore a small piece of
ribbon which I had playfully tied there about a year ago. She had given her heart, even before she was
conscious of possessing one, to a stranger unworthy of the gift.
As the evening drew on, a gust of wind blew open the door of the dark room, and a gleam of
sunshine streamed in, lighting up a portion of the wall. It was the time when every evening she would
join me under the mango tree. She had been quiet for almost an hour, and now a slight pressure of her
hand drew my eyes back to her face.
‘What will we do now?’she said. ‘When will you send me to school?’
‘Not for a long time. First you must get well and strong. That is all that matters.’
She didn’t seem to hear me. I think she knew she was dying, but she did not resent its happening.
‘Who will read to you under the tree?’she went on. ‘Who will look after you?’she asked, with the
solicitude of a grown woman.
‘You will, Madhu. You are grown up now. There will be no one else to look after me.’
The old woman was standing at my shoulder. A hundred years — and little Madhu was slipping
away. The woman took Madhu’s hand from mine, and laid it gently down. I sat by the cot a little
longer, and then I rose to go, all the loneliness in the world pressing upon my heart.
